In 1947 Portland, Maine, banker Andy Dufresne
is convicted of murdering his wife and her
lover, and is sentenced to two consecutive
life sentences at the Shawshank State Penitentiary.
Andy is befriended by contraband smuggler,
Ellis "Red" Redding, an inmate serving a life
sentence.
Red procures a rock hammer and later a large
poster of Rita Hayworth for Andy.
Working in the prison laundry, Andy is regularly
assaulted by "the Sisters" and their leader,
Bogs.
In 1949, Andy overhears the captain of the
guards, Byron Hadley, complaining about being
taxed on an inheritance, and offers to help
him legally shelter the money.
After an assault by the Sisters nearly kills
Andy, Hadley beats Bogs severely.
Bogs is then transferred to another prison.
Warden Samuel Norton meets Andy and reassigns
him to the prison library to assist elderly
inmate Brooks Hatlen.
Andy's new job is a pretext for him to begin
managing financial matters for the prison
employees.
As time passes, the Warden begins using Andy
to handle matters for a variety of people,
including guards from other prisons and the
warden himself.
Andy begins writing weekly letters asking
the state government for funds to improve
the decaying library.
In 1954, Brooks is paroled, but cannot adjust
to the outside world after fifty years in
prison, and commits suicide by hanging himself.
Andy receives a library donation that includes
a recording of The Marriage of Figaro.
He plays an excerpt over the public address
system, resulting in him receiving solitary
confinement.
After his release from solitary, Andy explains
that hope is what gets him through his time,
a concept that Red dismisses.
In 1963, Norton begins exploiting prison labor
for public works, profiting by undercutting
skilled labor costs and receiving bribes.
He has Andy launder the money using the alias
Randall Stephens.
In 1965, Tommy Williams is incarcerated for
burglary.
He is befriended by Andy and Red, and Andy
helps him pass his GED exam.
In 1966, Tommy reveals to Red and Andy that
an inmate at another prison claimed responsibility
for the murders for which Andy was convicted.
Andy approaches Norton with this information,
but he refuses to listen and sends Andy back
to solitary confinement when he mentions the
money laundering.
Norton has Hadley murder Tommy under the guise
of an escape attempt.
Andy declines to continue the laundering,
but relents after Norton threatens to burn
the library, remove Andy's protection from
the guards, and move him to worse conditions.
Andy is released from solitary confinement
after two months, and tells Red of his dream
of living in Zihuatanejo, a Mexican coastal
town.
Red feels Andy is being unrealistic, but promises
Andy that if he is ever released, he will
visit a specific hayfield near Buxton, Maine,
and retrieve a package Andy buried there.
He worries about Andy's well-being, especially
when he learns Andy asked another inmate to
supply him with six feet (1.8 meters) of rope.
The next day at roll call, the guards find
Andy's cell empty.
An irate Norton throws a rock at the poster
of Raquel Welch hanging on the cell wall,
revealing a tunnel that Andy dug with his
rock hammer over the last 19 years.
The previous night, Andy escaped through the
tunnel and prison sewage pipe, using the rope
to bring with him Norton's suit, shoes, and
the ledger containing details of the money
laundering.
While guards search for him, Andy poses as
Randall Stephens and visits several banks
to withdraw the laundered money, then mails
the ledger and evidence of the corruption
and murders at Shawshank to a local newspaper.
FBI agents arrive at Shawshank and take Hadley
into custody, while Norton commits suicide
by shooting himself to avoid his arrest.
After serving forty years, Red is finally
paroled.
He struggles to adapt to life outside prison
and fears he never will.
Remembering his promise to Andy, he visits
Buxton and finds a cache containing money
and a letter asking him to come to Zihuatanejo.
Red violates his parole and travels to Fort
Hancock, Texas to cross the border to Mexico,
admitting he finally feels hope.
On a beach in Zihuatanejo he finds Andy, and
the two friends are happily reunited.